Group Photo of Women who were awarded during the Top 40 under 40 Women’s gala dinner at Simba Corp Aspire Centre, Nairobi on March 10, 2023. PHOTO | BONFACE BOGITA | NMG Winners of the 2023 edition of the Top 40 Under 40 Women award by the Nation Media Group (NMG) were feted on Friday following a competitive season that attracted more women in entrepreneurship widening the scope of finalists. The 40 Women were treated to a gala dinner at the Simba Corp Aspire Centre in Nairobi's Westlands and awarded with African Queen head sculpture trophies among other goodies. Caroline Mutoko (left) and Patricia Mativo, the UN Population Fund Vice-President pose for a photo during the Top 40 under 40 Women’s gala dinner at Simba Corp Aspire Centre, Nairobi on March 10, 2023. PHOTO | BONFACE BOGITA | NMG In this year’s awards, 46 percent of the nominees were either from technology, education, or health, providing a snapshot of the corporate landscape in a country where job creation has stalled. A near similar ratio in the sectors was witnessed in the 2022 Top 40 under 40 Men edition at 47 percent, signifying that they offer the biggest job and wealth creation segments in Kenya, going forward. NMG chief executive Stephen Gitagama honoured the winners in the event where Equity Bank group executive director Mary Wamae was the chief guest. Ms Wamae challenged the winners to dream big, have a sense of purpose, and mentor young people to become the best version of themselves. “Start with a dream, operate with a sense of purpose that enables you to transform society and pull someone along with you so you create a legacy,” she said. Business Daily Editor Michael Omondi (left) gives an award to Angel Warira, Board member, National Youth Council during the Top 40 under 40 Women’s gala dinner at Simba Corp Aspire Centre, Nairobi on March 10, 2023. PHOTO | BONFACE BOGITA | NMG Top 40 Under 40 is a Business Daily annual award recognising and feating outstanding 40 men and women under 40 years in corporate leadership, professional services, enterprises and the Juakali sector, sports, arts, and creatives who have made a great impact in their field and society. Judges were considering the nominees’ achievements and their contribution to the community by improving lives. “Being on the list means you have worked twice as hard, so enjoy the glow but know that it comes with greater responsibility. Do not be confined just by Kenya, let Africa and the world at large be your stage,” said one of the three judges, Google Africa's head of communications and public affairs Dorothy Ooko. Her sentiments were echoed by motivational speaker Dr Wale Akinyemi who told the Top 40 Women winners that the biggest legacy is not the money they create, but rather the lives of people they impact. Nation Media Group CEO Mr Stephen Gitagama (left) gives an award to Centre for Suicide Research and Intervention Director Mary Waihiga during the Top 40 under 40 Women’s gala dinner at Simba Corp Aspire Centre, Nairobi on March 10, 2023. PHOTO | BONFACE BOGITA | NMG Sponsors of the event included East Africa Breweries Limited’s whiskey brand Johnnie Walker, Tecno's Phantom brand, Pathologists Lancet Kenya, integrated marketing agency Dentsu, and Simba Corp. Last year, NMG established the Top 40 Under 40 Club bringing together winners from previous Top 40s, which offers a platform for mentorship, networking, and policy impact. FULL LIST: 2023 TOP 40 WOMEN UNDER 40