The National Treasury building in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG The public procurement watchdog has dismissed a petition by Burhani Engineers Limited challenging the award of a Sh152 million tender by the Kenya Airports Authority to supply and replace airfield ground lighting cables and accessories at Eldoret International Airport. Burhani Engineers Limited who were eying the job but lost had sought a review of the award of the tender to rival Contractlinks Solutions and Services who had won the lucrative tendering by beating four other bidders. The Public Procurement Administrative Review Board has however rejected their prayers, saying that Contractlinks Solutions and Services Limited won the tender competitively. READ: State to take all public tenders to online platform “The request for review filed on 26th October 2022 by the applicant for supply and replacement of airfield ground lighting cables and accessories at Eldoret International Airport be and is hereby dismissed,” the board said in a ruling. The feud arose from the Kenya Airports Authority's invitation in August 2022 of bids to supply and replace airfield ground lighting cables and accessories at Eldoret International Airport. The open national tender attracted six bidders whose proposals were opened on 14th September 2022. The bids included Integrated suppliers and consultancy (Sh135 million), Africa Engineering Suppliers Limited (Sh150 million) and Trojan Trading Company Limited (Sh147 million). Others were Magnate Ventures Limited (Sh89 million), Contralinks Solutions and Services (Sh152 million) and Burhani Engineers Limited (Sh60 million). At the preliminary evaluation stage of the tender, four tenders were found to be non-responsive which included the Burhani Engineers tender, while two tenders were found to be responsive which included Contralinks Solutions and Services tender. After technical and financial evaluations, the tender committee in October 2022 recommended that the contract be awarded to Contractlinks Solutions and Services at a sum of Sh152 million. ALSO READ: Public procurement challenges during crisis Burhani Engineers however on October 25, 2022, however, filed a suit at the PPARB to challenge the award of the tender to Contralinks Solutions and Services Limited. Burhani wanted PPARB to re-evaluate the tender to determine the right lowest evaluated bidder. → botieno@ke.nationmedia.com