Perfect gifting ideas for hard-to shop-for persons. PHOTO | NMG Holiday shopping is always an exciting affair, but we all have that one person who leaves huffing, and puffing trying to find that one trinket that they will cherish. Their taste is either too particular or too vague, or even worse, they seem to have everything. What do you get someone who seems to have everything? Look no further, harried shopper. When it comes to those hard-to-please folks, I’ve got you covered. With this bi-polar December weather, a pair of warm and cosy house slippers will put a smile on even that scrooge-faced recipient. To make them extra special, you could have them custom knitted in the recipients favourite colour or have their name written. A pair of warm and cosy house slippers will put a smile on even that scrooge-faced recipient. PHOTO | POOL Nothing is as annoying as tangled necklaces especially when you need to put one on in a hurry. That’s where a jewellery organiser saves your life and time. Even the most picky person will appreciate having their life made easier and their jewellery lasting longer with a jewellery organiser. No more tarnished earrings, tangled necklaces or missing studs. Having to unpack your entire suitcase or carry-on luggage to take out your laptop at airport security checkpoints can be a nightmare. That’s why this elegant unisex laptop sleeve from Safarii would be the perfect gift for that person who is always on business trips across the world. Laptop sleeve from Safarii would be the perfect gift for that person who is always on business trips across the world. PHOTO | POOL It is made for both men and women, can fit a 14” laptop and has a long adjustable shoulder strap. Something unique about this particular laptop sleeve is that it is made of vegan leather. READ: Light up your festivities with these creative flower ideas A gift that any globetrotter will swoon over is a portable luggage weighing scale. Having to pay extra for your overweight luggage or dump your precious items at airport trash can put a dump on an otherwise exciting trip. Save your recipient the stress of guessing the weight of their luggage until getting to the airport with this digital luggage weighing scale from Safarii. Even the most difficult person has to eat at some point, right? Kengla Utensils have a plethora of dandy kitchen essentials that would make excellent holiday gifts. A few options are: a wooden tea sachet organiser, double-wall glasses and mugs, metallic bread bin with bamboo lid to keep bread fresh, and so much more. These aren’t just items to use everyday, they are aesthetically pleasing decor pieces that add a sense of opulence to any kitchen. A highly functional yet thoughtful gift for that workaholic recipient who will nurse cup after cup of coffee for hours would be this smart warming mug from Purpink Gifts. It comes with a wireless charging coaster that maintains beverages at 55 degrees celsius, a mug and lid. A smart warming mug from Purpink Gifts comes with a wireless charging coaster that maintains beverages at 55 degrees celsius. PHOTO | POOL An exciting feature of this gift is that the coaster can also function as a charger for mobile phones too.   Members of the beard gang do not play when it comes to their precious mane. If your recipient falls in this category, the MANDEVU Beard-Wash set will definitely impress them. The set comes complete with a wash bag, the signature MANDEVU beard wash that has a minty- cooling effect, and a round beard brush (plus storage) to style and distribute beard oil. The gentlemen with a taste for fine things such as cigars can be difficult to gift. However, this 100% leather Cigar Pouch from JOKA JOK Leather is bound to please. It comes completely kitted with cigars (of your recipient’s choice), a lighter and a cutter. Find out what cigar variety your recipient enjoys and have it included in the pouch. Another unique detail about this pouch is that it is 100% made in Kenya. READ: Making savvy money decisions this Christmas Anyone who loves their books and notes will absolutely fall in love with the KITABU Leather Journal from JOKA JOK Leather. It’s a 100% leather pouch with an interchangeable A4 booklet. Journaling for the new year just got classier. It is the season to pop a few bottles and make merry, so this VINGLANCE wine chiller will be a highly appreciated gift for that recipient who loves their Chardonnay. It comes in a lightweight, portable design that is sure to keep wine, champagne or any other like-sized beverage perfectly chilled for hours with no condensation. It’s portable design allows you to use it even outside your home. Your recipient will marvel at the possibility of showing up to picnics, barbecues and potlucks this holiday season with drinks ready to pour. At the end of a long year, all anyone wants is some tender loving care. From what you know about your recipient, get a voucher for their favourite spa and in case they don’t indulge in such as much, pick one that offers a wholesome mani-pedi, facial and massage experience. A moment to breathe and relax is bound to make even the most difficult person smile. Gifting your picky friend just got easier with this list. Happy shopping!