Beer cocktails to cure hangovers. PHOTO | POOL It is that time of the year when we all love making merry and celebrating with our family and friends. When it comes to eating, households will be filled with meat and chapati aroma, but thereafter they will go on a binging spree. Therefore, there is a need to elevate mindful drinking this festive season with beer cocktails and mocktails. Here is a beer cocktail guide to cure hangovers and save your wallet. Belgian-style brewed beers make the best beer champagne. You can opt for 254 Brewing Co's Belgian-style brewed beer, Muratatu. It is fruity with a honey-like aroma, making it the best base for beer champagne. Beer champagne recipe includes 1 sugar cube, 100ml of Sprite soda, and 150ml of Muratatu Belgian Tripel Beer. To make the cocktail, coat a sugar cube to a fruit glass. Pour the chilled sprite soda and Muratatu Belgian Tripel into a chilled fruit glass and serve. Michelada is a spicy and tart cocktail made from a fresh cold craft beer. This easy recipe is the perfect drink for a hangover breakfast or afternoon tacos. Michelada recipe consists of fresh Niaje Lager Beer, Worcestershire sauce, hot sauce, and lime juice. Kind of a weird combination of ingredients, right? Well, it works. READ: Toasting to 2023: Two easy-to-prepare cocktails As you might imagine, the lime juice adds acid and the hot sauce adds heat. Worcestershire sauce adds a depth of flavour to the drink. A Michelada tastes like beer, but there’s just so much more going on. It’s tart, salty, spicy, and fizzy. The best part about a Michelada is that you can enjoy it any time of day. To make this cocktail, you'll need 1 teaspoon of salt, half a teaspoon of sugar, a quarter teaspoon of chilli powder, 50ml of lime juice, 2 teaspoons of hot sauce, 2 teaspoons of Worcestershire sauce, and 200ml of Niaje Lager Beer. Fill with lime juice, hot sauce, and Worcestershire sauce. Add beer. If the entire beer doesn’t fit in the glass, serve alongside Michelada and continue adding as you make room in the glass. Stir gently. Most beer-mixed drinks are easy, but few are as simple as the shandy. This popular drink requires just two ingredients and it’s the perfect way to give your favourite beer an apple, citrus, orange or lemon twist. The shandy is simply a 50-50 mix of beer and fruity fresh juice; it can either be a lemonade, orange, citrus, apple, pineapple, or Fitzy drinks and you can personalise it in many ways. To make a beer shandy, you need 210ml of Sand Trap IPA, 60ml of fresh juice or Soda, and a lemon slice to garnish. Stir gently and serve. If you want to be a bit adventurous, go for the IPAs. Most IPAs beers are bitter. To balance the International Bitterness Units (IBUs), the best way is through beer sangria cocktails. IPAs beers such as Sand Trap and Golden Rump are best to make a beer Sangria. The best part of drinking a sangria is eating fruits at the end. The trick is finding complimentary flavours to balance out the bitter, earthy, hop flavour of a good beer. Sangria is actually best for a crowd as opposed to making a single cocktail. Why? Because when you make Sangria, the best part is allowing your freshly cut fruit to soak in booze. For this cocktail, you need 1 grapefruit, 1 orange (preferably orange import), 1 lemon (preferably lemon import), 60ml of vodka, 660ml of beer preferably Muratatu. Combine sliced fruit, pineapple juice and vodka in medium-sized container. Refrigerate for at least 2 hours. Transfer the mixture to a pitcher. When you are ready to serve, combine beer with the fruit mixture in a large pitcher. Serve over and enjoy. READ: Bartenders for festive parties The margarita provides that sweet-tart punch that you look for in a tasty cocktail and the crisp fresh beer lightens the drink up to create an incredibly refreshing ice-cold drink. This is a fun drink to serve, too, because you shove the beer bottle into the margarita portion and serve the mug with half the beer still stuck in the bottle. As you lower the volume in the glass by drinking it, the beer will continue to pour out. The recipe includes 120 ml of tequila, 60ml of fresh orange/lime/lemon juice,20ml of syrup, 20ml of liqueur (of your choice preferably Baileys Delight), 200ml of fresh crisp craft beer (preferably Niaje Lager). Using a Moscow metallic mug, add ice cubes and all the margarita ingredients: tequila, lime juice, syrup, and liqueur. Pour the beer into the glass and submerge the top of the beer in the liquid. It won’t overflow if you do it well. → githinjipatrick@gmail.com