Portrait of the late Veteran Journalist Catherine Kiza Kasavuli during her requiem mass at Friends International Centre in Nairobi on Thursday, January 12, 2023. PHOTO | DENNIS ONSONGO | NMG Every so often an event occurs that reminds us of the need to be more deliberate in how we treat our national heroes and heroines. The death and funeral service of Catherine Kasavuli makes the list of such occasions. Catherine pioneered broadcast journalism as an anchor in Kenya. When one thinks of Kenya’s most celebrated news anchors, her name will invariably be at the top. Therefore, her death was a great shock to not just her family and the media industry but to all Kenyans. READ: Remember our national values Two events brought the plight of such heroes to the fore from the death of Kasavuli. First, on her death, the family and media colleagues had to raise a public appeal to help offset her medical bill. The fact that it had to take such a public plea is an indictment of the state of our medical services in the country. Despite the right to health being a constitutional right, its guarantee is still very minimal with most Kenyans suffering from an inability to afford and access quality medical care. Consequently, being diagnosed with a life-threatening ailment is more often than not a death sentence for the patient and a ticket to poverty and misery for the family. The second event was a photo on social media of the gravelling of the road to Kasavuli’s home. One reader then quipped that while she could not enjoy such access to her rural home in life, in death the government had now quickly addressed the issue. Another person responded that the road was more for those who would attend her funeral as opposed to being for her. The larger question though is whether we celebrated her enough in life. Her case is representative of several other heroes. The case of Joe Kadenge who also passed on sometime back quickly comes to mind. We have a robust legal framework underpinned by a constitutional provision on the recognition and honouring of heroes nationally. However, both in our laws and in practice, the focus seems to be on political leaders and those in public services. While part of our heroes, they are not the only ones. There are many private citizens who continue to do exemplary acts and bring dignity and pride to the nation. Many of them go unnoticed and uncelebrated until a calamity befalls them and then our national conscience gets pricked. It is necessary to be more deliberate in our recognition and celebration of heroes. This will both demonstrate our appreciation for the contributions of such individuals and also provide examples and role models for younger members of society, contributing to building a cohesive and strong society where hard work and excellence are the norm. READ: Recognising the frontline heroes Funerals will thus be reserved for condoling with the bereaved and not the first time to honour heroes in society. Those charged with leading Kenya’s efforts to honour the exemplary men and women in society should take time to reinvigorate and refocus our national processes.