Make power cheaper in a subsidy-free era. PHOTO | NMG The elimination of electricity subsidies should not negate the need for cheap power for homes and businesses. The subsidy, whose cost will hit Sh26 billion, was meant to ease the inflation crisis and boost economic growth by making energy bills competitive compared with other African nations such as Ethiopia, South Africa and Egypt. But President William Ruto has been against subsidies imposed by his predecessor Uhuru Kenyatta on items like petrol and staple maize food, terming them unsustainable. We agree that the multi-billion shilling subsidies risk emptying Kenya’s coffers, making it critical to seek long-term solutions for the soaring living costs. Consumers often complain of high electricity charges, with some of the costs attributed to idle capacity charges to compensate power generators for electricity generated but ultimately not used. This is the problem that the Ruto administration should cure in the quest for cheaper electricity Under the typical power purchase agreement, a producer gets paid for any electricity generated, even if Kenya Power can’t sell it to consumers due to excess capacity and other reasons. Therefore, Kenya must retire and renegotiate some of the power purchase agreements that have made electricity bills steep, making Kenya-made products uncompetitive and killing jobs. The high cost of electricity will also unleash pricing pressure across the economy as producers of services and goods factor in the higher cost of energy. This will be a blow to consumers who are also grappling with historically high prices for fuel and food amid the worst drought in 40 years. The starting point is the implementation of recommendations of a task force, which proposed a review of the agreements, in particular the expensive thermal power. The retention of the diesel generators doesn’t also justify the huge public investments made in geothermal and wind power in recent years as well as tapping cheaper Ethiopian electricity.