Employee engagement is a concept very close to the hearts and minds of human resources professionals. PHOTO | POOL “Employees who believe that management is concerned about them as a whole person – not just an employee – are more productive, more satisfied, more fulfilled. Satisfied employees mean satisfied customers, which leads to profitability.” - Anne M. Mulcahy. Employee engagement is a concept very close to the hearts and minds of human resources professionals. It should equally be to all leaders as it determines and predicts how an organisation is able to ace its strategic direction. READ: MAGOMA: Outplacement services: Giving workers an upward footing during termination   Employee commitment and performance are conjoined like Siamese twins. When you hear that an organisation has challenges in achieving its goals and objectives the most likely culprit is a lack of sufficient employee engagement. When you hear that an organisation has high toxic levels it can be traced to employee commitment to excellence. Employee engagement is going beyond satisfaction. Employee engagement is the capacity and capability to continuously generate enthusiasm or high-level energy to accomplish a particular set of tasks within their job description. It is the assembling of programmes, policies, procedures and processes that will consistently increase hundred percent commitment. Employee engagement is exceeding expectations in performance. A hundred percent commitment to achieving excellence rises and falls on transformational leadership. The centrepiece of achieving productivity, profitability, efficiency and effectiveness is set by the leadership of the organisation. Scholarly arguments have been advanced that employees don’t leave organisations but they leave leaders. It is leaders who will create the most conducive organisational climate for the realisation of the mission, vision and core values of the organisation. READ: MAGOMA: How high-performing organisations retain top human resources for a competitive edge Well-trained and highly competent leaders will spur creativity and innovation, reduce toxicity, promote diversity and inclusion, boost effective communication, and promote justice, equity and continuous improvement through learning and development. Employees imitate their leaders. Mr Magoma is an Award-Winning HR expert and trainer;richardjellican@gmail.com