Chairman KenGen, Retired General Samson Mwathethe. FILE PHOTO | CHEBOITE KIGEN | NMG Maurice Nduranu and Joseph Sitati have resigned from the board of KenGen in the shakeup of the leadership of the company, which has also seen the departure of Peris Mwangi and Phyllis Wakiaga. KenGen chairman Samson Mwathethe revealed the pair had decided to retire to pursue other personal interests at the firm’s annual general meeting (AGM) last Thursday. Ms Wakiaga had earlier indicated that she would not offer herself for re-election as a director of the company during the firm’s AGM. Read: KenGen denies Kenya Power Sh1.7 billion in tariff discount At the same time, Peris Mwangi, an independent & non-executive director has been ousted from her post after failing to garner adequate support to retain her seat despite offering herself for reappointment. During the AGM, four persons including Treasury Cabinet secretary Njuguna Ndung’u were elected as shareholders to fill vacancies on the board. Other additions to the board included those of Energy PS Alex Wachira, Julius Migos Ogamba and Rosemarie Wairimu Wanyoike. Mr Nduranu was an independent and non-executive director at KenGen and previously served as African Alliance asset manager and investment fund Acumen. Mr Sitati was also an independent and non-executive director and previously served as the chief finance and administration officer at Deacons East Africa. He has also held senior roles in finance at Coca-Cola, Old Mutual and Shell BP Kenya. Ms Wakiaga, who retired on rotation, had served the board of KenGen in a similar capacity and is the immediate former chief executive at the Kenya Association of Manufacturers and the current chairperson of the Kenya Roads Board. The board changes at KenGen are representative of continued shakeups within State-controlled and partially State-owned firms, with the changes having gathered steam from the change in administration. Last week for instance, Safaricom appointed Adil Khajama as its new board chairman replacing John Ngumi who had a short-lived stint at the helm of the telco. Read: KenGen opens new 83 megawatt plant at Olkaria John Ngumi was seen as the blue-eyed boy in the administration of Uhuru Kenyatta. Other entities that have seen board shakeups recently have included the Kenya Revenue Authority. → kmuiruri@ke.nationmedia.com