Vehicles driving along Mombasa Road just past the JKIA entrance of the Nairobi Expressway. PHOTO | FRANCIS NDERITU | NMG The Government plans to acquire additional land to upgrade the old Mombasa Road by expanding some sections, building walkways and Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) after the current rehabilitation being done by a Chinese contractor is completed. The upgrade will start soon after the ongoing rehabilitation of some sections of the road, which were destroyed during the construction of the Nairobi Expressway, is complete according to a source from Kenya National Highways Authority (Kenha). Documents from the National Treasury show that taxpayers will spend an estimated cost of Sh24.8 billion on the Nairobi Expressway, which was essentially sold as a privately funded road. READ: How new expressway will further hurt SGR fortunes By end of June last year, the exchequer had released a total of Sh5.93 billion for the toll road, with an outstanding balance of Sh18.9 billion to be released later. A big chunk of the money that has already been released was used for land compensation during the construction of the Nairobi expressway and the transfer of such utilities as water pipes, electric lines and poles and fibre optics. Although all the funds have not yet been disbursed, the Business Daily understands that some funds will be set aside for the upgrade in the upcoming budget for the Financial Year 2023/24 as part of funds that taxpayers will spend on the Nairobi Expressway that runs from Westlands, Nairobi to Jomo Kenyatta International Airport. The old Mombasa road was left in a dilapidated state after the completion of the Nairobi Expressway, whose construction phase saw the contractors dig up not just segments of Mombasa Road but also Uhuru Highway and Waiyaki Way. Additionally, the building of the 27.4-kilometre highway chipped away some lanes of these highways, leaving narrower roads that have been characterized by high-traffic gridlock. Already, Moja Expressway Company, a subsidiary of CRBC, has started rehabilitating sections of the old Mombasa Road that were demolished during the building of the Nairobi Expressway, a toll road for which motorists are paying as much as Sh417 to use. These repairs are expected to be completed by end of this year before the government can start the process of having the old Mombasa Road upgraded. This scope of work on the old road involves fixing the drainage system, erecting a bus rapid transport system on the road, and fixing pedestrian walkways, and it is estimated that this will cost around Sh9 billion. “Construction of the walkways is yet to start and money has not been expressed. Moja Expressway will have to first finish their repairs,” said the Kenha source not authorised to speak to the media. The design also provides the erecting modern lighting system and recarpeting of the old road. The expenditure of Sh24.8 billion is in addition to a contingent liability of the multi-billion project that exposes Kenya’s government to lawsuits should the project abort before the 27 years that the contractor, China Road and Bridge Corporation, is expected to recover its investments. READ: Land prices soar 20pc on Nairobi Expressway lift The Nairobi Expressway is one of the several PPP projects for which the government has taken a letter of support covering political risks. Moja Expressway will operate the toll road for 27 years before handing it over to the Kenya National Highway Authority (KeNHA). → dakure@ke.nationmedia.com