A Mechanic working on a car engine. FILE PHOTO | NMG Recent reports in the media indicate that an amendment Bill seeking to raise the threshold of tenders that local firms can exclusively access from Sh500 million to Sh20 billion has been tabled in Parliament. The Public Procurement and Asset Disposal (Amendment) Bill (PPADB) 2022 seeks to promote local content by offering more opportunities for Kenyan entrepreneurs to market their products, especially in government infrastructural projects. While the aforementioned endeavour is commendable, its implementation would require a national tax policy (NTP) that mirrors the intention of the Bill. The Treasury this month called on stakeholders to submit comments to the draft NTP. What stands out like a sore thumb in the draft and which would contradict the proposed amendment to the PPADB 2022, is the continued focus on taxation as the sole means of generating government revenue without due consideration to the prudent management of resources, elimination of waste and corruption as well as diversifying the tax base to make taxation equitable. The draft NTP does not demonstrate deliberate, facilitative policies and strategic investments for industry, agriculture, manufacturing, trade and service sectors among other potential areas of our comparative and competitive advantage locally and regionally. The favourable policy is critical in shoring up consumption of our locally manufactured goods — the expected outcome of the proposed amendment. However, the objective will remain elusive if stakeholder input in the draft NTP is rejected. Consider, for example, the country’s exponential rate of infrastructure development. The tenders for road infrastructure, which expanded by 6.6 percent in 2021 compared to a growth of 10.1 percent in 2020, translated to a 23.4 percent increase in cement consumption. Conversely, the quantity of locally manufactured lubricants did not grow in tandem with the growth in road infrastructure which witnessed a marginal growth of 3.0 percent yet there was an increase in imports of lubricants by 26 percent. China’s imports of lubricants increased by 288 percent yet there is a 30 percent local sourcing rule, never mind that Kenya is home to five modern lubricant manufacturing plants that have 60 percent of the over 130,000 tonnes installed capacity underutilised. Meanwhile, Kenya’s diesel and petrol consumption grew tremendously between 2008 to 2021, averaging 13 percent annually, catalysed by the increase in the number of motor vehicles from 250,000 to 2.5 million in the same period. These two growth factors should be in tandem with lubricants demand but this is not the case given the average 6.0 percent performance between 2008 and 2021. This shows that something is grossly wrong and it must be corrected if the value of tenders that the PPADB 2022 is proposing to be exclusive for Kenya firms is to make sense and if the intention is to benefit the build Kenya buy Kenya value chain. It would be foolhardy to award construction tenders to Kenyan firms and then cause them to import that which is locally available due to the high costs of locally manufactured products compared to imports as well as flooding our market with substandard imported goods as in the case of lubricants imports.