Patents are a branch of intellectual property law that grant inventors exclusive rights to their inventions. FILE PHOTO | SHUTTERSTOCK According to Oxford Learners’ Dictionary, a genius is a person who is unusually intelligent. I have a friend who is a genius. I rated them genius because they always seem to have great ideas buzzing around their heads, ideas which if you think of it are so genius that if implemented they could provide solutions to world problems. This friend seems to be a modern day Isaac Newton. It is said that Isaac Newton formed the gravitational theory after watching an apple falling and randomly asking himself why the apple fell downwards not sideways. The friend in question makes random scientific conclusions by observing simple day occurrences. If you are a genius reading this or are a business owner with genius employees I just thought of a genius strategy to put all that good genius to use. Read: Mputhia: The tool that cuts cost and gives competitive edge Supposing one gets a genius random thought like, “can we invent an eco-friendly boat that works by converting kinetic energy produced while rowing the boat into electrical energy?” For starters, I am no scientist so I do not have the answer to that question. However, what I can assist with is the strategy to commercialise this genius. I would of course suggest that the genius write down his concept and do more of research on the concept. Perhaps have further discussions with other geniuses on the same subject to work out the details of how to actually go about this. You must be wondering where I am going with this after all what does the law have to do with kinetically powered boats? The law can provide any scientist with a strong research base. The question for most inventors is, “has this been done before?” A second question would be “can I do it differently?” The law can provide you with clear answers to the above two questions. Intellectual property law is the branch of law that protects the creations of the mind. Intellectual property is further categorised into different categories depending on the nature of the mind creation. Patents are a branch of intellectual property law that grant inventors exclusive rights to their inventions. Before one can be granted a patent then they have to disclose technical information about their patents and these include drawings and a detailed explanation of the patent. Some of the granted patents are available in the public domain meaning they are accessible to anybody. I hope you can see where I am going with this. A scientist can do a patent database search to check whether the concept he wants to invent has already been patented elsewhere. The patent will have a detailed disclosure and technical information and a patent search will help the scientist compare his own concept to already existing patents. I did a five-second search of my “kinetically powered boat” and found that there is indeed someone else who owns a patent called “device for boat propulsion or energy production.” Supposing you do a patent search and find that there is already a similar patent as happened in my case. All is not lost because you can still differentiate your concept and come up with something new. Patent searches have been used in doing competitor analysis where large companies critically analyse their competitor's patent thanks to the technical disclosures. Read: Mputhia: Basic legal skills every manager needs They then do product differentiation by building on their competitors’ weaknesses. They then patent their new inventions and this helps them to attain a competitive edge. I would recommend the geniuses do patent searches of their concepts. You never know what the patent search could yield. Ms Mputhia is the founder of C Mputhia Advocates | cathymputhia@gmail.com