Lion Lights founder Richard Turere during the interview at the Nation Centre on October 26, 2022. PHOTO | DIANA NGILA | NMG You most definitely have heard or read about Richard Turere from his book, Lion Lights. Richard, a young Maasai herder, watched as his family and community struggled with losing their livestock every single day when lions attacked their cattle pens. Using knowledge gained from tinkering and fixing the home appliances such as breaking his mum’s radio, the then 12-year-old boy salvaged components and innovated blinking lights to mimic the movements of someone using a torch to watch over the herd. This solar-powered light system worked in keeping the lions away and helped in reducing the human-wildlife conflict. Today, his invention Lion Lights has been adopted by 750 homesteads in his community and is also used in Africa, Asia, and South America to protect farm animals from predators. In addition to innovating this idea, Richard has been invited to key platforms to give a talk and advice. Kenya is a fertile ground for innovation. Many young people in Kenya just like Richard are coming up with brilliant and creative solutions to social complexities. However, the one element of successful innovation being overlooked is commercialising these ideas into profitable businesses or products. Wondering how possible innovation can be monetised and create jobs as well as a source of income? Let us first start by understanding what innovation really means. ISO TC 279 in the standard ISO 56000:2020 defines innovation as “a new or changed entity realising or redistributing value”. Hence there is a focus on newness, improvement, and the spread of ideas or technologies. Taking the case of Richard, if he decided to just use the Lion Light solution for his family’s benefit only, the rest of the 750 homesteads and other countries would have never benefitted from this innovation. Innovators have to make these products, services, technologies, artworks, and business models among other innovations more available to markets, governments, and society. They have to think of commercialisation at the very design phase of their innovation. Start by acknowledging the cost incurred during the ideation and design stages. Richard used different resources such as the home appliances and importantly his time to develop a solution that was so needed within and outside his community.