The media is essential for our democracy. FILE PHOTO | NMG The election season is over, but Kenyan politicians continue to behave occasionally as if a new election is just around the corner. The general feeling is that politicians should take a break from politicking and let the nation-building go on. But in reality, for them, this is the profession they know. They may argue that if they took a break from politics, what else would they do? Ordinarily, just like the electoral cycle, politics needs to follow a cycle. After an election politicians should spend time either implementing the ideas they successfully sold to the public or using their ideas as a basis for engaging those that were successful in the elections. They should also take the chance to reflect on their performance in the last election, refresh their strategies and engage in necessary reforms at the political and electoral levels. A review of the state of the Kenyan nation always leaves one with mixed feelings. While we have an extremely transformative Constitution, our democracy is in flux. Politicians control the narrative of what is really happening in the country. They thrive in competition and sometimes conflict. In the midst of this situation, one who just wants to mind their business. The economy, for example, is and has been under strain for years. The politicians have played a big part in that. They largely look at the state of the economy through a political lens. However, it requires more than politics to get to grips with the solutions to the challenges affecting the economy, society and the environment. Amidst this reality, it is necessary to have an objective voice that cannot just keep the political leaders in check, but do so with a sense of objectivity and candour that develops and ensures that our democracy grows. Past election seasons in the country have dimmed the voices of most such actors. Unfortunately, it has become tempting to sacrifice neutrality at the altar of short-term political interests. Despite this, the state of the country is such that these voices must introspect and resurrect for the benefit of the country. The media is essential for our democracy. The Constitution not only guarantees its freedom but also calls for its independence. While its reputation, like that of several bodies, took some beating from the August General Election, the reality is that its voice is needed to keep our political class in check, to keep our citizens aware and at the centre of governance and to oil our democratic accountability processes. The media though must move away from the temptation to pretend to be neutral yet in reality they are applying the doctrine of political parallelism in their relationship with politics and political parties. This alliance with political leaders compromises their objectivity and denies the country a critical voice.