Businessman Paul Wanderi Ndung'u has bought 5.1 million shares of Home Africa. PHOTO | FILE A residential property belonging to Paul Wanderi Ndung'u, billionaire businessman fighting for his stake in SportPesa, is up for auction. In a notice on Tuesday, Garam Auctioneers listed the four-bedroom double-storey house in Gigiri, near the United Nations offices, for sale. The property sits on 2.8 acres and consists of the house, which currently serves as an office, a single-storey servant's quarter block, an external kitchen and a carpot. "All that parcel of land known as L.R. No. 7258/52 (I.R. No.22387) Gigiri Estate, Nairobi City registered in the name of Paul Wanderi Ndung'u g/t Simba Fresh Produce Limited," reads the notice for auction. It is unclear which lender has put the property of the businessman fighting for control of the betting firm after he was expelled as a shareholder of Pevans East Africa, the SportPesa owner, at zero compensation for his 17 percent stake, for non-payment. Read: Ndungú's stake in Sportpesa firm risks seizure without pay The auction will be held on March 21. Three adjacent commercial farms in Solio Ranch, Laikipia, linked to Simba Fresh Produce Limited, the firm co-listed with Mr Ndung'u in Gigiri, have also been put up for sale. "All those parcels of land known as L.R. Nos. 11571/42 (I.R. 113227/8); 11571/43 (I.R. 113227/9), and 11571/44 (I.R. 113227/10) Simba Fresh Produce Farm, Solio Ranch, Laikipia County registered in the name of Homes and Commercial Holdings Limited g/t Simba Fresh Produce Limited," the notice reads. The 600-acre farm is under cultivation with fresh vegetables, avocados, sorghum and fodder grass. It also consists of an administration block and pack house, permanent store - inputs, workers' quarters, semi-permanent store, garage shed, filed ablution blocks, and animal closures. Other infrastructures include boreholes, pump houses, solar panels stand, water towers, field holding sheds, and two dams. The auction will be held on March 24. → dakure@ke.nationmedia.com