A patient undergoes cancer screening at the Integrated Molecular Imaging Center (IMIC) located at the Kenyatta University Teaching Referral and Research Hospital on January 10, 2022. PHOTO | LUCY WANJIRU | NMG Globally it is estimated that there are 400,000 new childhood cancer cases and more than 80 percent of these are found in low and middle-income countries like Kenya. Although the national cancer registries for childhood cancer in Kenya have not captured all the data, it was estimated by GLOBOCAN 2018 that the country diagnosed about 3,200 new cases which was an underestimation since population statistics propose that we should be diagnosing about 6,000-7,000 new cases a year. Unfortunately, about 50 percent of children with cancer in Kenya do not get a diagnosis at all! Most of the adult cancers can be linked to lifestyle factors like exposure to infectious agents, alcohol or cigarette smoking, unhealthy diets, obesity and possibly environmental toxins. However, most childhood cancers have no known risk factors with only about 5-10 percent being associated with genetic or inherited syndromes like Downs Syndrome. Read: Inside Kenya's first cancer drugs trial  Screening of childhood cancer is of minimal value as most of the symptoms and signs of the disease are shared with other infectious illnesses. It is, therefore, necessary, for parents and healthcare providers to maintain a high index of suspicion, especially for patients who do not improve on conventional therapy for infectious diseases, and have symptoms that persist, or worsen while on treatment. In high-income countries, the cure rate of childhood cancers is above 80 percent, but that of lower-middle-income countries (LMICs) is still way below 20 percent. A local study at the Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital found that only 20 percent of children being treated for childhood cancer in Kenya would survive their diagnosis. We attribute the dismal outcomes of childhood cancer in our setting to late presentation, a low level of awareness of symptoms and signs by caregivers and frontline healthcare providers, weak referral systems, inadequate diagnostic and treatment facilities, and financial challenges when parents and caregivers have to pay for their health services out of pocket. Access to effective diagnosis and treatment is crucial to improving survival rates for childhood cancers in LMIC. It is important for childhood cancer to be diagnosed early because it significantly improves the outcome of treatment. The Gertrude’s Hospital Foundation runs an annual Childhood Cancer Charity Walk that seeks to raise $10 million every year to improve cancer diagnosis and treatment, as well as raise awareness among the public and primary healthcare providers in various counties in Kenya. While the efforts of one player can have a significant impact on the lives of children who are able to access them, there is a long way to go in improving Kenya’s diagnosis and treatment capacities for childhood cancer. There is a need for a cross-cutting approach that takes into consideration the roles of clinicians, hospitals, insurers, researchers, and policymakers in setting up adequate and effective diagnosis and treatment systems across the country. Also read: Coping with fear of breast cancer relapsing Indeed, there is hope for a brighter future for the children struck by cancer’s blight as long as all stakeholders act to improve the ecosystem. Dr Karimi is a haemato-oncologist at Gertrude’s Children’s Hospital.