Burj Al Arab skyscraper in Dubai, UAE. FILE PHOTO | NMG United Arab Emirates (UAE) has increased tourist visa fees by 37 percent to Sh12,778 (370 dirhams), which will put pressure on thousands of Kenyans travelling into the country for vacation and business. Dubai has announced that foreign nationals will now pay AED 370 (Sh12,778), up from AED 270 (Sh9,324), and an additional AED 50 (Sh1,726) travel insurance fee for a one-month visit visa. Dubai has been a top destination for Kenyans for vacation and trade due to its close proximity, with a section of investment-savvy Kenyans also seeking to build property portfolios in the investment hub. The new changes are set to increase the fees charged by travel agents across that country who facilitate travel while applying different rates for their profit margins. The changes will also be applicable to foreign nationals who are not eligible for a visa on arrival or visa-free entry to the UAE. Kenya is among the countries that are required to get a visa before travelling to Dubai. The Federal Authority for Identity and Citizenship, Customs and Ports Security (ICP) also increased application fees for wealthy internationals interested to acquire residency in the country to AED150 (Sh5,180) from AED50 (Sh1,726). UAE has been urging wealthy foreign nationals including highly trained Kenyans among them doctors and scientists to apply for 10-year visa to support the development of its economy. The long-term residence visa targets individuals in science and knowledge, such as doctors and inventors, nurses and healthcare officials and creatives in the fields of culture and art or those in real estate. For investors, they must have a fund inside the UAE valued at Sh69.1 million (2 million AED) or more. The visas will allow foreigners, their family members and two of their business partners to settle in UAE and enjoy the benefits of a permanent resident. Dubai’s General Directorate of Residency and Foreign Affairs data shows a total of 79,617 golden visas were issued by UAE authorities in 2022. The nation also increased fees for a new Emirates ID card that is valid for two years for foreign nationals by AED 100 to AED 370. → ekivuva@ke.nationmedia.com