Sex & The City: Alliance Française, Nairobi, February 15-28. The exhibition portrays snapshots of a lifestyle of social realities, without glorifying promiscuity. Recent Works by Jessica Atieno: Redhill Art Gallery, until March 5, 2023. Jessica Atieno explores the role of historic photographic archives in reconstituting current perspectives. Beauty Kenya 2023: The Sarit Expo Centre, February 10-12. Exhibitors from 15 countries. Agrofood Kenya 2023: The Sarit Expo Centre, February 10. An annual platform for valuable business contacts. Global manufacturers will attend. Africa Tech Summit Nairobi: The Sarit Expo Centre, February 15-16. Moonwalk Carnival: Oshwal Centre, February 11, 6:30 pm. Join for a moonlit night filled with food, games and entertainment. Africa Media Festival: Radisson Blu, UpperHill, February 14, 8 am. The sector players discuss forward-thinking initiatives. No Simple Way Home moview screening: UNSEEN Nairobi, February 9-23. As peace in South Sudan hangs in the balance, a mother and her two daughters return home from exile. Someone Somewhere: Alliance Française, Nairobi, February 13, 6pm. Two lonely neighbours would be perfect for each other if only... French Film Festival: Alliance Francaise, Nairobi, until February 13. Young Engineers: Shamba Cafe, February 11-18. Children’s coding and robotics classes. Conversation Workshop: Alliance Française, Nairobi, February 4 to March 4. Looking to work on your fluency? Discussions on diverse topics. Skills Gala: Montessori Learning Centre, until February 25. Squeaky Clean: Kabete Junior Academy, until February 25. Teaching children to be independent. Rhumba Friday: Benelux Lounge, Greenspan Mall, February 10. Live Rhumba music by Johnny Junior and BV Band. Friday Rave: Bahama Breeze, Westlands, February 10. Boutross will be performing live, hosted by Damah and Marsh. Roots Vibes: KICC, February 11, 12 pm. Nesbeth first time in Kenya. Opening Acts: Ja Piny Kenya, Jah Lead Ghana, Phoenixx Journey Netherland and Ja Piny featuring Raven Re. Sunday Fun Affair: La Cascada Sports Bar Ruaka, February 12. Live rhumba music by Rhumba Afrique Band. Ladies who Brunch Kenya: Barrels and Stools Lounge, February 11, 12 pm. A premier event for the #SoftBlackGirl who loves to dress up and show out!  Park and Tune: Anzana Gardens, February 11, 12 pm. Enjoy good music from top Djs from your car. Dogs and Kisses: Ankara Garden resort, February 11, 11 pm. Let's show our dogs some love this Valentine's. Creating Better Men: Carnivore Grounds, February 14, 2 pm. Male bonding and also mental health, family laws, and financial literacy talks. Echoes: Alliance Française, Nairobi, February 10 - 12. An intimate play about choice, chance, devotion and the infinite possibility of love. Of A Dying Breed: Goethe-Institut, February 11, 4 pm. This is a poetry concept show by Slim Shaka exploring the freedom and independence of African history, and its relevance to the modern youth. Fire Ceremony with Plant Medicine & Sound Meditation: Loresho Gardens, February 11, 10 am. Unleash your power of meditation around a fire, communing with the Amazonian plant medicines cacao, bobinsana and hapé. We The Medicine - Healing our inner child 2023: Online, February 11, 12 pm. Join to share and learn new skills to help deal with PTSD, anxiety, depression, fear and childhood traumas. Forgiveness Archives – Healing Meditation: Chez Mahmadi, February 12, 10 am. This meditation is all about breaking free. Midsummer Night's Dream: Kenya National Theatre, Friday February 10 at 7pm, Saturday February 11th at 3pm and 7pm (gala), Sunday February 12 at 1pm and 4:30. William Shakespeare's tale of a Midsummer Night's Dream! Mix and Mingle - Valentine's Edition: Generali Lounge, February 11, 4 pm. An experience through Niteout. It’s a fun, unique, interactive event. Valentine Day Love Party: Serene Valley Spa, February 11, 2 pm. Meet Me Singles: Roasters Inn, February 11, 6 pm. A singles people event. Valentine's Pop Up Market: The Waterfront Karen, February 11 - 12. Shorts, Shorts and Shots: Valentine's Edition: Shalom House, February 12, 2 pm. The event features a line-up of short films from Africa. Happy Valentines Day: Nairobi National Museum, February 13 - 19. Put your love in words this season and engage in letter writing. Say it with Dinner: Village Market, February 14. Dazzle your love with dinner from Harvest Restaurant Lovers Party: Midwest Bar & Restaurant, February 14, 7 pm. Free glass of wine for ladies in red. Valentine's Day Drive-In: The Gigiri Courtyard, February 14. Vintage Drive-In theme for in-car meal service. Lover's Day Out: Anga 20th Century CBD, Anga Diamond Plaza, Anga Sky, February 14. Enjoy the remastered version of the Titanic on its 25th anniversary. Magical Valentine's Movie Night: Giraffe Manor, February 14. Enjoy a five-course menu with wine pairing, and a feel-good movie under the stars. Dine and Dance: Shamba Cafe, February 14. Spoil yourself on Valentine's day by dancing to live salsa, kizomba and bachata dance music. Valentine's Speed Dating Party for Single Professionals: Chester House, February 16, 6.30 pm. Enjoy as you meet friends, a soulmate or even a future colleague or client.