South Africa, Algeria, Tunisia among best as Kenyan dishes fall off the rankings. FILE PHOTO | SHUTTERSTOCK South Africa, Algeria and Tunisia are the only three African countries that have made it to the world’s best cuisines top 50 list recently published by Taste Atlas. Taste Atlas is an experimental travel guide for traditional food that collates authentic recipes, food critic reviews, and research articles about popular ingredients and dishes, according to Wikipedia. Taste Atlas, who describe themselves as a “world atlas of traditional dishes, local ingredients, and authentic restaurants” published its 2022 list of the best 95 cuisines in the world. The company claims that its interactive global map contains nearly 10,000 dishes, drinks, and ingredients, as well as 9,000 restaurants. Taste Atlas says that the world’s cuisines are ranked according to audience votes for ingredients, dishes and beverages. Read: Chef Kim gives Kenyan cuisine global flavour It names the best restaurants where one can try the named cuisines of a given country. According to “Taste Atlas Awards 2022: Best Traditional Dishes, Best National Cuisines, Best Local Restaurants of the world,” Algerian cuisine is in the 34th position. The best-rated Algerian foods are Deglet Nour, Rechta, Chakhchoukha, Makroud el louse, Tajine zitoune, and 23 others. South African cuisine came in the 36th position. The best-rated South African foods are Blatjang, Braai, Pampoenkoekies, Roosterkoek, Potjiekos, and 44 others. In 48th place is the Tunisian cuisine which includes Harissa, Mechouia Salad, Lablabi, Houria, Brik and 14 more. According to Taste Atlas, Italy, Greece, Spain, Japan and India were the top five countries on the 2022 list. Topping the list is the Italian cuisine including Parmigiano Reggiano, Prosciutto Toscano, Nduja, Risotto ai funghi porcini, Pesto Genovese and 2,437 more. Greek cuisine comes in second place with Kalamata, Fystiki Aeginas, Rodakina Naoussas, Saganaki, Dakos and 393 more. Ranking third is the Spanish cuisine Jamón 100 percent ibérico de bellota, Jamón ibérico de bellota, Manchego curado, Espetos, Gambas à la plancha and 798 more.Japanese cuisine sits in the fourth position with Ikura, Kobe Beef, Ramen Noodles, Karaage, Bento and 535 more. The fifth position is taken by Indian cuisine with Garam Masala, Ghee, Malai, Butter Garlic Naan, Keema and 460 more. Egyptian cuisine was ranked in the 51st position with Areesh, Domiati, Rumi, Mulukhiyah, Hawawshi and 31 more. The 55th place went to Ethiopian cuisine with Berbere, Doro wat, Shiro, Injera, Kik alicha and 43 others. Nigerian cuisine is in the 70th position with Jollof Rice, Efo-Riro, Moin moin, Banga Soup, Suya and 26 more. Moroccan cuisine comes in the 94th position with Ras el hanout, Argane, Alnif Cumin, Chicken Tajine, Kaab el ghazal and 51 others. Last on the list (95th place) is Norwegian cuisine which includes Norwegian Salmon, Jarlsberg, Geitost, Lefse, Kjøttboller and 107 more. Meanwhile, the Japanese stew “Kare” was ranked first on the list of the 100 best-rated traditional dishes in the world in 2022. The Brazilian meat cut “Picanha” came second. Read: Platform links travellers to authentic local cuisines The clam dish “Ameijoas a Bulhao Pato” from Portugal is in the third position. Ranked fourth and fifth respectively are the Chinese dumpings “Tangbao” and “Guotie.” The “Phanaeng Curry” stew from Thailand is in the sixth position.