Dairy cows at Meved dairy farm at Rukanga in Kirinyaga County. FILE PHOTO | JOSEPH KANYI | NMG Who moved my butter? Just like the story of cheese in Spencer Johnson’s book Who Moved My Cheese? Kenyans have been thrown into a maze searching for butter, which has become a scarce commodity in the country. It has now become standard for Kenyans to ask friends travelling from abroad to carry some butter for them. In a reflection on Who Moved My Cheese?, Johnson tells us the story through the eyes of four characters: two mice (Sniff and Scurry) and two “little people” (Hem and Haw). The cheese they search for represents what people want — success, happiness and personal fulfilment. Even though the book uses humour and simple language to convey its message, it is clear that people need to be open to change and be willing to adapt to find and keep what they want in life. In our efforts to create jobs, wealth and prosperity, change and adaptation are the constants. And here, I don’t mean external factors of change but the many internal behaviours that hinder our progress, like procrastination, overanalysing issues and fear of failure. The enemy of our progress is within us. Until we take the blame, we are a long way from prosperity. When demand exceeds supply, opportunities abound. But the question we must ask ourselves: who moved the butter? We did in many ways, but we are often afraid to admit it. So instead, we search for more creative answers like blaming the weather changes or disease outbreaks among dairy animals disrupting the supply chain. In addition, spikes in demand and limited production capacity undermined the market. And remembering the latest addition, the Ukraine war. While all these responses sound credible and, to some extent, true, the real glitch is in our culture. The nature of the problem is akin to Hem and Haw’s (used to describe the in-decision predicament in the book). Hem’s resistance to change for fear of the unknown is characteristic of our fretfulness to invest in some dairy value chains, including butter. Indeed in 2019, we should have sniffed the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics Food Balance Sheet. It calculates the average quantity of a given food commodity consumed by an individual annually. The report indicated that the consumption of milk and its related products had the highest per capita consumption (93.3 kilos) in Kenya, followed by maize (69.5kg), wheat (41.3kg) and vegetables (32.6kg). And then we are scurried to invest in milk and related products like butter because anything that beats maize into position two should be of great concern. We failed. A large portion of dairy production is consumed locally, fresh or fermented (sour milk), into different non-commercial variants, such as the famous Mursik (Kalenjin variant), which has never become a flagship brand. Therefore, we do more non-entrepreneurial activities while we aspire to become entrepreneurial to succeed. Let me be more specific. Any survey (like I did for this article) about the top consumer food products will show that butter isn’t one of them. But data on production, consumption and even imports show that significant changes have happened and shaped butter into a critical product in Kenya. If we had more Sniffs (sniffs the difference) and Scurry (one who swings into action), the story of the dairy sector could be different. Although Haw can learn and adapt to change, many of our haws need to be more proactive to respond to change before it is too late to succeed. In this regard, the sector regulator could do more to empower new entrants in a sector dominated by few processors. In addition, encourage investments in every value chain, including developing local variants into national and international brands. The dairy sector is central to Kenya’s efforts to eliminate poverty, create decent jobs and build a prosperous nation. Specifically, the dairy sector should be assisted in developing productivity centres in every value chain, including primary production, collection and transportation, processing of all products, packaging, distribution, and sales, as well as retail and consumption. In addition, support the sector in building a data repository and research. Further, institutions of higher learning should build incubation centres and facilitate creativity and innovation through regular hackathons, especially around the development of traditional milk variants into global brands. In addition, incubates should be supported with all elements of business development services, such as adopting new technologies, networking opportunities and particular capacity development. Addressing the shortages in the dairy sector demands our ability to sniff and scurry. It also requires a combination of investment in the industry, improved supply chain management, and government policies that support the development of the dairy industry.