Kenya Power workers at work along Nyerere Avenue in Mombasa. FILE PHOTO | KEVIN ODIT | NMG It is undeniable that the ubiquitous motorcycle taxi — popular as boda boda — plays an essential role in East Africa's public transport system and is a source of income for many youths. Two-thirds of vehicles on the road in Kenya are motorcycles, and this is on the rise. But as these numbers grow, so do greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution emitted by these fossil-fuel-powered modes of transport. This impacts the successful implementation of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. Given that the motorcycle is the most common mode of transport in the region, supporting the transition to electric power solutions should be a priority. The relatively lower cost of electricity to power motorbikes is a key attraction of electric mobility (e-mobility) compared to petrol-guzzling versions. Rwanda’s e-mobility industry continues to thrive, thanks to the government's commitment to renewable energy. According to the Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Authority, there were over 1,000 electric motorcycles in Rwanda as of June 2021. The government has made significant strides in expanding access to renewable energy sources and this has helped to keep the cost of electricity low, which in turn has supported the growth of the e-mobility industry. In Kenya, the e-mobility sector, having shown such promise, now faces an uncertain future with the unusually high electricity tariffs recently mooted. The country already had amongst the highest tariffs in the East African region. The manufacturing sector has understandably been quick to voice its concerns that these rises will render them uncompetitive. The proposed tariffs will produce an overall cost per kWh for electric vehicles (EVs) that are nearly double the current world average of 16.5 US cents. Higher electricity prices will also have serious implications for Kenya’s ambitions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and for the tens of thousands of e-motorcycle riders, the majority of whom use their vehicles commercially. While we welcome the foresight shown by the government in allocating a specific tariff for e-mobility, the proposed new electricity rate does not match the ambitions and the commercial realities of the industry. This is compounded by the added cost of the battery, maintenance, cost of extension of charge infrastructure and VAT among others since these new vehicles lack the well-developed incentives and regulations that apply to more established sectors.