Kenyan grain traders seeking to import maize from Tanzania will now be required to register their companies in Dar es Salaam. FILE PHOTO | NMG Pulses are among the earliest crops to be consumed by mankind. Research shows that cultures that have pulses at the center of their menus have a relatively longer and healthier lifespan. Pulses come with many advantages to human nutrition and the environment. Unfortunately, their uptake remains low even as malnutrition continues to increase with the advent of climate change. This has been blamed on a lack of awareness of the benefits of pulses. In an effort to promote the production and consumption of pulses, 2016 was declared the International Year of Pulses by the United Nations in addition to World Pulse Day celebrated every February 10, with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) taking the lead. Today is World Pulses Day, during which we honour and celebrate these small leguminous grains that give us life — our pulse so to speak. It is probably an apt time to talk about pulses. Kenya and the region is currently experiencing a prolonged drought that has negatively impacted food security, subsequently increasing cases of malnutrition. It is also a time when many lifestyle diseases and conditions emanating from poor diets are claiming lives. Yet this group of seed crops can offer a solution that many are yet to espouse. Pulses are a group of nutritious superfoods, with a long shelf life and easy to cook, that provide an affordable source of plant protein. Pulses are high in fibre, low in fat and contain no cholesterol. They are also rich in vitamins and minerals. Having a good stock of pulses during emergencies ensures a constant source of protein when households cannot access animal-source proteins. They include dried seeds of leguminous crops like green grams, beans, cowpeas seeds, pigeon peas, lentils, chickpeas, and dry peas, which produce edible seeds that come encapsulated in pods. Pulses are a good vehicle for mineral biofortification. Research institutions in Kenya have provided a variety of beans rich in iron and zinc, which presents a good opportunity to eradicate micronutrient deficiencies. The burden of lifestyle diseases is currently on the rise. Pulses can come in handy to deliver a healthy and curative diet. Pulses are low in fat and very rich in fiber and thus have the benefit of lowering cholesterol and subsequently control blood sugar, and therefore of great benefit to people living with diabetes, obesity and heart conditions.